[RFC][Project API] Extend metadata in ProjectOption (#33)
apache/tvm-rfcs: rfcs/0020-project_api_extend_metadata.md

- Feature Name: project_api_extend_metadata
- Start Date: 2021-09-09
- RFC PR: [apache/tvm-rfcs#0020](https://github.com/apache/tvm-rfcs/pull/0000)
- GitHub Issue: [apache/tvm#0020](https://github.com/apache/tvm/issues/0000)

> [RFC][Project API] Extend metadata in ProjectOption

Reviewer: I think this should just be the `Feature Name`.

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Extend metadata associated with project options provided by the Project API.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Currently metadata associated with project options provided by the Project API
is insufficent to allow building easily and automatically command line parsers
used by CLI tool like TVMC.

> The metadata available for the project options, stored in instances of the
> ProjectOption class, A) do not provide a list of the API methods which support
> the options, B) do not allow to determine if the options are required or
> optional, C) and do not provide a default value if one is used by the Project
> API server. As a consequence it complicates the integration with command line
> interfaces that need to create command line arguments based on the project
> options available for a platform.

Reviewer: Could this be split into a markdown list rather than embedding it into the sentence?
```suggestion
The metadata available for the project options, stored in instances of the ProjectOption class are limited as they do not:
1. Provide a list of the API methods which support the options
1. Allow determination if the options are required or optional
1. Provide a default value if one is used by the Project API server.

As a consequence it complicates the integration with command line interfaces that need to create command line arguments based on the project options available for a platform.
```

This RFC proposes to extend the existing metadata with four new members in

> ProjecOption ('required', 'optional', 'type', and 'default') to address issues

Reviewer: Small typo and would be easier to read as a code snippet:
```suggestion
`ProjectOption (`required`, `optional`, `type`, and `default`)` to address issues
```

A, B, and C and ease the integration of Project API with CLI tools.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

> Below it is explained in detail the need and properties of the four new members
> ('required', 'optional', 'type', and 'default') proposed to be added to the
> ProjectOption class to extend the project option metadata returned by Project
> API 'server_info_query' method. 'required', 'optional', and 'type' are proposed
> as required fields, whilst 'default' is proposed as an optional field.

Reviewer: Code snippets could make this clearer:
```suggestion
Below it is explained in detail the need and properties of the four new members
(`required`, `optional`, `type`, and `default`) proposed to be added to the
`ProjectOption` class to extend the project option metadata returned by Project
API `server_info_query` method. `required`, `optional`, and `type` are proposed
as required fields, whilst `default` is proposed as an optional field.
```

Modals like "must", "may" and similar ones are interpreted in this RFC
accordingly to the semantics defined by the IETF RFC-2119, 1997.

## On "required" and "optional" metadata

Currently even though all options available for a given project can be

> discovered via the Project API 'server_info_query' interface there is no way to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
discovered via the Project API `server_info_query` interface there is no way to
```

> known which options belong (or apply) to which API method (like the
> generate_project, build, flash, and open_transport methods).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
know which options belong (or apply) to which API method (like the
`generate_project`, `build`, `flash`, and `open_transport` methods).
```

This is fine when the user knowns beforehand which method accepts a set of
options, so it's possible to manually select which options will be passed to a
given API method, like when using the API in a Python script.

However that's a problem when the API user (e.g. TVMC) needs to automatically
determine the options available for the API methods, like when automatically
building a command line parser with subcommand domains that closely mapped to
the API methods (e.g. subcommands to create, build, and flash a project).

Moreover, currently it's impossible to determine which option is required and
which one is optional, so it would be at least necessary for the API user to
build a static ad hoc table with all options available on a given project
stating which option is required and which one is optional for the project. This
is impractical to maintain and would result in the API user having to update the
the static table every time an option is added, removed, or modified in the
Project API server.

Hence to ease the automatic detection of the options available on each Project

> API method the following two new metadata are proposed: 'required' and 'optional'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
API method the following two new metadata are proposed: `required` and `optional`.
```

> Both will contain a list of method names for which the option is available,
> either as a required option (if in 'required' list), or as an optional option
> (if in 'optional' list). At least one API method must be listed in 'required' or
> in the 'optional list. A method name must be listed only in the 'required' or in
> the 'optional' list, i.e. an option can't be require and optional at the same
> time for given API method. An option can be required for a method and optional
> for another method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both will contain a list of method names for which the option is available,
either as a required option (if in `required` list), or as an optional option
(if in `optional` list). At least one API method must be listed in `required` or
in the `optional` list. A method name must be listed only in the `required` or in
the `optional` list, i.e. an option can't be required and optional at the same
time for given API method. An option can be required for a method and optional
for another method.
```

> The elements in the lists 'required' and 'optional' must be in the set of method
> names implemented by the ProjectAPIClient class and that have the parameter
> 'options' defined. These methods are dispatched to the server, which implements
> the server counterparts to properly handle the client dispatches and
> ultimately defines the options available for each API method. The current method
> name that satisfy these criteria are 'generate_project', 'build', 'flash', and
> 'open_transport'.
> 
> 'required' metadatum or 'optional' metadatum (or both) must be provided for
> every option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The elements in the lists `required` and `optional` must be in the set of method
names implemented by the ProjectAPIClient class and that have the parameter
`options` defined. These methods are dispatched to the server, which implements
the server counterparts to properly handle the client dispatches and
ultimately defines the options available for each API method. The current method
name that satisfy these criteria are `generate_project`, `build`, `flash`, and
`open_transport`.

`required` metadatum or `optional` metadatum (or both) must be provided for
every option.
```

## On "type" metadatum

The option type can sometimes be determined implicitly by what's return

> in metadatum 'choices', but this not ideal. For example, for option 'verbose' it
> would be possible to infer it is a boolean option and therefore it can be
> converted to a command line flag if metadatum 'choices' is a couple of True and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in metadatum `choices`, but this not ideal. For example, for option `verbose` it
would be possible to infer it is a boolean option and therefore it can be
converted to a command line flag if metadatum `choices` is a couple of True and
```

False. Nonetheless that would lead to cumbersome logic at API user side (e.g.
TVMC) to infer the option type, like iterating over the tuple elements to search
for True or False. This can be solved directly if the option type is returned
explicitly with the option.

> Thus adding a 'type' metadatum allows a much simpler way for the API users to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus adding a `type` metadatum allows a much simpler way for the API users to
```

determine the type of an option when that is necessary for various reasons, like
when building a command line parser based on the available project options.

> The following types, passed as strings, are proposed for the 'type' metadatum:
> "bool", "str", "int", and "float".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following types, passed as strings, are proposed for the `type` metadatum:
`"bool"`, `"str"`, `"int"`, and `"float"`.
```

> 'type' metadatum must be provided for every option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`type` metadatum must be provided for every option.
```

> The following types, passed as strings, are proposed for the `type` metadatum:

Reviewer 2: can you state the rationale behind these limits to capture it here? IIRC we settled on only non-complex JSON-serializable types.

Author: Sure. Do you think it's correct to use **packed** types to refer to dict, tuple, and list instead of complex  types (the non-complex types would be the non-packed types so)?

Reviewer 2: do you mean `struct.pack` or `PackedFunc`? I don't think `PackedFunc` has a place in this RPC, as it's using JSON-RPC not TVM RPC. I would think we would use JS objects to represent more complex values if we did go that direction, but honestly i prefer to not if possible to avoid over-complicating this.

Author: @areusch I didn't mean neither `struct.pack` nor `PackedFunc`. :) I'm actually acknowledging that we've settled on only non-complex JSON-serialized types. My last question is almost a nit, and I just would like to know if it would be ok to use the term 'packed' types instead of 'non-complex' types because I think Python uses that term to refer to built-in types like dict, tuple, list etc -- which we would like to not use here as we have settled.

## On "default" metadatum

Sometimes Project API uses a default value if an option is not specified, but
currently there is no way to determine it using the option metadata.

However it's important for CLI tools to inform users what's the default value
for a given option, if applicable, so the user can decide if it's necessary to
provide a different value.

The default values for the options on a project could be defined at the user
side (e.g. TVMC) but that's not ideal.

> Hence having an additional field 'default' in the metadata that the API can use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence having an additional field `default` in the metadata that the API can use
```

> Hence having an additional field 'default' in the metadata that the API can use
> to inform the user if the option has any default value is quite useful. It also
> avoids one to keep that information at the client / user side.
> 
> 'default' may be provided for an option, if applicable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence having an additional field `default` in the metadata that the API can use
to inform the user if the option has any default value is quite useful. It also
avoids one to keep that information at the client / user side.

`default` may be provided for an option, if applicable.
```

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

> All that's necessary to complish the proposal is to 1) extend ProjectOption
> class by adding the new fields discussed above and 2) adjust the existing
> platform options to comply with the required fields. An example follows
> considering the Zephyr platform:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All that's necessary to complish the proposal is:
1. Extend the `ProjectOption` class by adding the new fields discussed above
1. Adjust the existing platform options to comply with the required fields. 
An example follows considering the Zephyr platform:
```

```
diff --git a/python/tvm/micro/project_api/server.py b/python/tvm/micro/project_api/server.py
index 07d328597..323bf418a 100644
--- a/python/tvm/micro/project_api/server.py
+++ b/python/tvm/micro/project_api/server.py
@@ -50,7 +50,8 @@ class ProjectOption(_ProjectOption):
     def __new__(cls, name, **kw):
         """Override __new__ to force all options except name to be specified as kwargs."""
         assert "name" not in kw
-        assert "type" in kw, "'type' parameter must be specified"

> +        assert "required" or "optional" in kw, "'required' or 'optional' must be specified"

Reviewer: I think this resolves to `required or (optional in kw)`
```suggestion
+        assert "required" in kw or "optional" in kw, "'required' or 'optional' must be specified"
```

         choices=tuple(PROJECT_TYPES),
+        required=["generate_project"],
         type="str",
+        help="Type of project to generate.",
     ),
     server.ProjectOption("verbose", help="Run build with verbose output.", type="bool"),
     server.ProjectOption(
         "west_cmd",
+        optional=["generate_project"],
+        default="python3 -m west",
+        type="str",
         help=(
             "Path to the west tool. If given, supersedes both the zephyr_base "
             "option and ZEPHYR_BASE environment variable."
         ),
+    ),
+    server.ProjectOption(
+        "zephyr_base",
+        optional=["build", "open_transport"],
+        default="ZEPHYR_BASE",
+        type="str",
+        help="Path to the zephyr base directory.",
+    ),
+    server.ProjectOption(
+        "zephyr_board",
+        required=["generate_project", "build", "flash", "open_transport"],
+        help="Name of the Zephyr board to build for.",
         type="str",
     ),
-    server.ProjectOption("zephyr_base", help="Path to the zephyr base directory.", type="str"),
-    server.ProjectOption("zephyr_board", help="Name of the Zephyr board to build for.", type="str"),
 ]
```

> 

Reviewer 2: it would be great to spell out a brief explanation of how we plan to enforce these things (e.g. modify `server.py` and `client.py` to remove options provided which aren't in `required` or `optional` for the given call).

Author: @areusch hmr I'm not sure I got it. I was thinking of it more along the lines of having all the provided options as having a `required` or `optional` list (or both), so never having an option which has neither a `required` list nor a `optional` list. Also an option provided is not *in*  a `required` or `optional` list... hmm but wait, did you mean "remove *methods*" (instead "remove options") provided actually?  :)

Author: I think I know what you mean, you meant enforce that an option like `zephyr_model` (which was actually just removed) ever exists right? (i.e. an option which is not really associated to any of the methods provided by the API right?) 
e.g.: https://github.com/apache/tvm/commit/73c28455d30df8167f3a596326fddeb294e7d11f#diff-e9070632c64e33062450a5c887a7a6b683d7294064584407aeff7aef24031dc1L293

Reviewer 2: i mean more like--what if server.py receives a call to e.g. `generate_project` but someone passes `"verbose": True`. `server.py` should remove that option as, on consulting ProjectOption for "verbose" it is e.g. not required or optional to `generate_project`. we could even error here. similarly we could add enforcement in `client.py`, but the `server.py` is the one i care about.

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> The impact on existing code is low and the current project options will only
> need to be adjusted to define the new mandatory fields, i.e. 'required',
> 'optional', and 'type', all are straightforward to be provided for the existing
> options on the current supported platforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The impact on existing code is low and the current project options will only
need to be adjusted to define the new mandatory fields, i.e. `required`,
`optional`, and `type`, all are straightforward to be provided for the existing
options on the current supported platforms.
```

> Adding the four new mumbers to ProjectOption will increase the size of
> ProjectOption class and consequently the amount of data return by
> 'server_info_query', however since Project API client and serve run on the same
> host that is negligible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding the four new mumbers to `ProjectOption` will increase the size of
`ProjectOption` class and consequently the amount of data return by
`server_info_query`, however since Project API client and server run on the same
host that is negligible.
```
